Hi there.
This is Dana.
And welcome back.
Let's now look at this very interesting feature called Streams, which was introduced in Java eight,
along with other features like lambdas method references and standard functional interfaces.
In fact, Streams is considered as one of the best use cases of lambdas, method references and standard
functional interfaces.
Streams is an API and it is introduced as part of a new package called Java dot dot.
Stream on stream is an interface and it has many methods and many of its methods use standard function
interfaces as method parameter types.
So when we are dealing with streams, we also have lambdas method references and standard function interfaces
coming into play.
So we have all of these major Java eight features coming into action when we are dealing with streams.
So these are all tightly bound and this is all you need to remember about streams.
It's all about performing SQL like operations on collections.
So we can perform some complex operations on collections which were not possible earlier before Java
eight.
So that's all you need to remember.
And it also offers the advantage of writing code in a declarative style.
And we will discuss that in a bit.
And it was also discussed in the intro lecture.
But here it need not be just collections.
It can also be arrays or comma separated list of values or even files when we are doing input output.
Or it can also be other kinds of sources.
But typically it would be collection implementations like URLs.
So we have this in our database world.
So we have a database and we have SQL queries which help us to manipulate data in the databases.
And we perform all kinds of complex operations like filtering using the where clause, the conditions
in the where clause are grouping data or sorting some data via the order by clause.
Or we can also perform summary operations like count, sum and average, so we can do all of these using
SQL.
But when it comes to collections in the pre Java eight world, we could of course add something into
the collection or we can get something from the collection or we can even search and we can also perform
other kinds of operations that are supported using various methods.
But we couldn't do any of this.
There were not any methods which were supporting these kinds of operations that were possible in the
SQL world, like filtering, grouping, sorting and some an average.
In case of sorting we can do external sorting using the collections class, using the source method,
but within the collection interface itself or the interface itself, there was no method like sort.
And when it comes to summarization, we could of course do count using the size method size method in
the collection, but we couldn't do some or average.
So in order to do such kinds of operations, we had to write our own code, we had to write some custom
code.
So that's one of the limitations on writing.
Such custom code is not readable, the code is not readable.
And the second issue is it's not easily realizable.
So we have to rewrite code in order to make it parallel able and that's very tedious.
So to address that, Java eight has introduced the Stream's API, which is part of this new package
called Java Stream.
And with that, we can do all of these operations like filtering, grouping and sorting and also the
summary operations.
So the Streams API provides methods in order to do this.
So with that, all the limitations are now benefits are turned into benefits.
So the developers need not write that custom code so they can just express what they want by invoking
the different methods.
There is a method for filtering and there's a method for grouping and sorting and those kinds of things,
and you can change those methods by doing so.
We are writing declarative code and developer is simply expressing what he or she wants.
So the result of this is we have much cleaner code and the code is also very easily realizable.
Now we have seen this example in the intro lecture in order to motivate ourselves for studying streams.
So here the goal is to categorize books.
So we have a list of books in the for each statement, and we want to categorize them by the category.
And we also want to categorize only those books which made this criteria with the rating of the book
is at least 4.5, and the final output of this will be stored in this hash map called books by category,
where the key is category and the value is list of books falling under that category.
So this we call as imperative programming, and this is what we have been doing throughout this course.
Now, like I just mentioned, it is easy to write this code.
It's not that difficult, but reading it is a bit difficult.
It's kind of unreadable.
And as I just mentioned, this code is committed to work in a sequential way in a single threaded environment.
So if we want to paralyze this, we need to rewrite it.
And that's very painful.
So in the intro lecture, we also said that the same logic can be expressed in a much cleaner way in
this way using the Stream's API.
So once again, here we have the books list or a linked list and we are invoking a method called stream.
And stream is essentially a method in the collection interface itself.
So it has been introduced in collection interface in the Java eight and it returns an instance of the
stream interface.
And the stream interface has these methods like filter and collect.
So we are invoking the filter method and to the filter method we are passing the lambda, which is nothing
but the rating of the book which needs to be greater than 4.5.
So that's our predicate.
And the filter also returns another instance of the stream interface.
So with that we are able to invoke the collect method.
So filter and collect are two methods within the stream interface and we also have the grouping by method
and we will discuss that later.
But as you can see, the filter and the grouping buy and collect together.
They are performing the same operation that we are performing with the imperative programming code.
So this is declarative programming and as you can see, it's very clean and it's also very efficient.
And what is happening here is we are doing internal iteration.
So the developer is simply specifying what he or she wants, that they want to filter something and
they want to grow by.
But the actual iteration and the grouping by is done internally within these methods.
So this is what is happening in sequel also.
So in sequel we have these queries for filtering.
We have the where clause and for grouping, we have the group by clause.
But how exactly the iteration and the grouping happens is taken care of internally by the database.
Similarly here also the iteration is taken care of internally by the stream API.
So what we get here is better abstraction, right?
So we get the better abstraction.
We just specify what we need and how it needs to be done is an implementation detail which is pushed
into those methods.
Now, if you replace a stream with parallel stream, the entire competition is paralyzed.
So GM would be able to leverage the different course in the system and it will be able to paralyze the
computation and make it much more efficient.
So that's what we get here using declarative programming.
Some Java engineers, senior Java engineers, they actually say that in future the code will be written
in this way.
So they say that it will be a mix of object oriented programming and also declarative programming,
which is nothing but here, functional programming.
So it would be a mix of both object oriented and functional programming.
So what we are getting here is more elegant code.
So the main advantage, just to summarize which streams we are able to perform more complex operations
on collections which were not possible earlier.
So we are able to perform SQL like operations.
But in doing so, we are actually writing declarative style code.
And with declarative style code we have these advantages of clean code, efficient code, and it's also
parallelism.
Now one last thing is so here we have lambdas and method reference, and these are what are enabling
us to embrace streams.
So these features are enabling developers to embrace streams.
So streams could also have been introduced before Java eight, but before Java eight there were no lambdas
or method references.
So we would have used anonymous objects and we know that anonymous objects are kind of verbose and they
wouldn't have made streams appealing to use, right?
So developers wouldn't have embraced streams.
So in order to use streams, we need something like lambdas and method references which are much more
concise to express, and that is what is enabling us to use streams and also develop other powerful
libraries.
So this is a good example.
But now let's head over to my editor and actually implement our demo program.
So we earlier we wrote the indexing program, which was about processing web pages.
So it was written in an imperative way.
Now let's convert that into declarative style and see everything in action.
So let's see some real functional style programming in action.
So let's head over to my editor for that.
Okay.
So for this demo, I have created this new class called Stream's Demo, and I have moved all of this
code from the Functional Interface Demo, which we have seen earlier into this new class, and it has
been cleaned up a bit.
So the main functionality has been moved here.
Now one change I have done is the functional interface demo earlier was in a package called Lambdas
under Common Underscore Semantics Square.
So I have renamed the package as semantic squared functional and that's about it.
So we have those three classes that we had earlier and for streams, this new class streams demo has
been created under this new sub package under functional called streams.
So any streams related class classes will go under this new package.
So this is what we have streams demo.
And we already have the imperative code and we are going to write a declarative code.
So that's how we are going to test it.
So here we have the four documents, and the four documents are accumulated into this list called documents.
And then we have this imperative method which is being invoked from the main method.
And we of course have the indexer class.
And within the imperative method, all we are doing is we are processing the documents and then we have
this predicate where we are checking if the document is about this word called stream.
And if it is, then we are performing two transformations.
So we have the transformation code here.
So we are invoking the HTML tags method and the indexer to do the first transformation.
And for the second transformation we are removing the stop words and it is being assigned to the function
standard interface.
So that's the imperative code.
Now let's see how we can write the declarative code.
So I have some comments here and I'm going to build on this.
So in order to implement stream, so we construct something called as a stream pipeline.
That's a common structure that we have when we are dealing with streams.
And here there are three things that we do.
One is we need to set up a source.
A source can be something like a collection implementation or another list or an array or other sources.
There can be other sources to.
Then once we set up the stream source, we just invoke the in case of collection, we invoke the stream
method.
Then we have zero or more intermediate operations and we have one final terminal operation which essentially
terminates the stream.
So that's what we have.
And here the setting up the stream source is analogous to the tables in the SQL world.
In the SQL world we have we select star from some tables.
So those tables are the source, right?
So similarly we have a source here and these intermediate operations could be something like filtering
or transformation or grouping, so.
So they are like the rare conditions or the group by clauses and each of the intermediate operations
they're written as stream.
So in our slide earlier we looked at the filter and collect filter.
Essentially filter filter would return a stream, an instance of stream.
And so that's an intermediate operation.
Similarly, there is a we also can have a terminal operation.
Now here, let me just run this.
So.
This is what we have.
This is what we have here.
So two of the documents are getting printed out of the four because there are because they are two of
the documents of the word stream.
So now this is what we have here.
The intermediate operations are called as lazy.
And I'm going to explain why it is called so and the terminal operation is called as IGR.
So we will look at that as we are writing the code.
So let's go ahead and let's say we have the documents.
So that's the ArrayList, and we just invoke the Stream method, which was introduced in the collection
interface, as I said earlier.
So this is what is introduced here now on the stream.
So it returns an instance of stream interface.
So let's go ahead and invoke the filter method.
So with this, we are getting a stream.
So you can think of stream as just a stream of something, a stream of all the documents.
And we will be processing each of those documents.
So let's invoke the filter method, because that's what we need to do the first thing.
And that's right, our Lambda.
So this is our predicate.
So if you look at stream here, so this is the filter method, so it accepts a predicate.
So this is essentially what we are doing here.
Also, we are assigning it to a predicate, but here we are making use of the streams API.
So once the filtering is done, we need to we need to transform.
So for transformation the stream because the filter is going to return another stream, another stream
instance we can invoke a method called map.
So the stream has a method called map and within the first map we will perform.
The transformation, the first transformation and the second map will perform the second transformation.
So the first transformation is simply invoking this strip HTML tags.
So we can just copy that.
So that would perform the first transformation.
And let's also put the second transformation, which is removing the stop words.
Finally we are just printing here so for that so map would also so both of these all three of these
are intermediate operations and all of them are returning.
A stream map is returning a stream and filter is also returning a stream.
So which means that finally we can invoke another method called for each here.
So far, each takes in consumer.
And it's a terminal operation.
So with that, we are going to terminate the stream.
So let me just go ahead and print this.
So here, let me also comment this.
Within this strip, we have this statement and I commented later, so let's just go ahead and run this.
So as you can see, we have the exact same output right over here imperative and this is declarative
and we can see that it's so nicely written.
It's very elegant.
So that's what we have.
And the next thing I want to talk about is about the lazy operations.
We said that these intermediate operations are lazy operations, which means that they will not be executed
with the invocation here.
So they're not going to be executed until the for each method is invoked.
So the for each method is an eager operation.
So only when Gvm is going to execute this, at that instance, it's going to execute these different
these different intermediate operations.
Until then, these operations are not going to execute.
So let's actually look at that.
Let me demonstrate that.
So let's put it semicolon here and let me come on this.
So here, this is a map and it's going to return a stream.
Of string.
Let's call it Stream.
So this is what we have.
And let me run this.
So as you can see, there is no output.
That is no for each statement.
Let me also put this thing back.
The stream.
Now you can see that in the imperative code it is printing.
The Sprint statement, which is inside the HTML tags.
But over here we don't have in the declarative code.
None of this is getting executed, so we are not.
The HTML tags method has not been invoked, so we just have these and these are lazy operations.
Now let me just put an advantage of this.
As we can invoke.
Let's say we can we can pass this stream to another method.
So I'm going to create that method and I'll just say.
Okay.
So we have this parameter as a stream of string.
So this is what we have.
And if we run this now, we can see that we get the output.
So if I comment this.
None of this none of it is getting executed because these are lazy operations.
But if I uncomment.
And if I run it, we see the output because we have that terminal operation over here.
So that's the thing.
Now, so here the source is this.
So you can see that the output is exactly identical, which means that we are iterating through the
documents in the stream.
Then we are applying this filter on the first, the filter on the on the first document.
And then if it has the word stream, then that document is being transformed here.
So that's why we have in strip HTML tags.
And then after that we are doing one more transformation and then we are printing here.
So, so it's not like we are doing the transformations first on all of the documents and then we are
printing.
So that's not happening here.
So it's happening.
The operations is exactly identical to the way it is happening and the imperative code.
So it is we are processing one document at a time and if it passes the predicate then we are applying
the two transformations and then we are printing it.
So that's exactly how it is happening.
So the entire functionality is just identical.
It's just much more elegant code.
Now, as I said earlier here, the sauce can be something else too.
It need not be just stream.
So let me just comment this out and let me say race class.
Let me use the race class.
And it has this new method called stream.
And we can pass an area here.
So here we want to use an array as, as the source for the stream.
So we will just say new.
So we are passing a stream, an area.
We have the area as the source this time.
So if you run it once again, it's going to be the same output.
Or we can also say we can also have a comma separated list for this.
There is a method called off here in the stream interface.
So we can just invoke that and we can pass all of these documents as comma separated list of values.
To the off method.
So it takes a water parameter.
So if I run this.
Once again we have the same output.
So in summary, the Streams API is allowing us to perform some complex queries on collections and in
a declarative way, which is helping us to have this kind of cleaner code.
And as I mentioned earlier, it can also be paralyzing easily.
And so that's about it.
And you can also check out this book called as Java eight in Action.
It's a very good book written by Raul Irma, Mario Fusco and Alan Mycroft.
So you can also read that book.
So it describes everything, the philosophy behind many of these Java eight features in a very nice
way.
So that's the thing I like about that book.
So it's a very good book whenever possible.
You can buy that if you want to.
Now let me also just quickly pull up the stream API.
So this is the Steam API, it's Java eight, but you can also use look at Java nine and this is the
stream interface and this is the Java Stream package.
So this is essentially the Stream API and there are some interfaces here and this is the stream interface.
So this is what we have.
Here.
So these are the different methods.
So we already looked at the.
The method filter here, which is taking a predicate.
Then we also looked at the mapping method.
And we will also look at other methods.
But this is the map method which takes function.
And these are all the different methods.
And we also looked at the off method, the.
There are also other methods like red use and sorted.
So these are all some methods in this particular interface.
Now, one thing is, once you do this.
So we cannot execute the terminal operation one more time.
So with this, the stream has been closed and we cannot execute the terminal operation for the second
time.
We would have to rebuild the team again.
So because of that, we are getting this illegal state exception.
So that's about it.
So that's a good introduction to streams and we will explore furthermore in subsequent lectures.
But this is what we have for now.
So I hope you enjoyed learning about it and thank you and happy coding and this code will be available
in the resources section.
Thank you.